# Using Food for Data Science Instruction
This is repository consist of all the code and report on my work for Capstone Project done at Rochester Institute of Technology.

# Abstract

Using difficult topics when teaching machine learning can induce anxiety in students and cause them to mentally distant from the subject matter resulting in a lack of teaching effectiveness.
Topics such as cancer, pandemics, mortality can distract the listener from the key points. Using familiar examples such as food, the students can learn the methodology without becoming distracted because it is more relatable.  This paper demonstrates methods of teaching machine learning using examples drawn from food and cooking.

# Background 

Traditionally, machine learning has been used for cancer diagnoses, climate change, classifying a virus, and other grim topics. For example, here is a paper~\cite{IEEEexample:brecan} on a Comparison of Machine Learning algorithms on breast cancer diagnosis. They have applied popular machine learning techniques to classify Wisconsin Breast Cancer dataset~\cite{uci}, and the classification performance of methods was compared with each other using accuracy, precision, recall, and ROC Area. The Support Vector Machines obtained the best performance with the highest accuracy. 

An example of climate change in Machine learning is this paper~\cite{IEEEexample:5406743}. The authors of this paper derive a hierarchical cohort of high-risk senior citizens, outpatients, clusters, and proactively deliver population health insights and timely health services through alerting governmental and non-governmental agencies. This system is developed using Apriori, Naive Bayesian, and artificial intelligence algorithms. 

In this paper~\cite{IEEEexample:5510726}, the authors used artificial neural networks for the prediction of important influenza virus antigenic types and the hosts, to create a computational system for influenza surveillance. They found that the accuracy of classification can vary based on the host and gene segment. Compared to virus such avian and swine flu, human viruses can be classified with a higher accuracy. This indicates that human viruses have adapted to their human hosts. All of these results show that Data Science can save lives. While these topics are incredibly important, it can be difficult for a student in a learning environment. 

Due to the current pandemic, there is a lot to be learned from the spread of viruses such as modeling viral spreading, exponential growth, and geometric decay. However, obviously, many people find it disturbing to talk about the virus because of the mortality rate associated with it. Instead of talking about a virus such as COVID-19, we can talk about food trends or fads. Fads can behave like a virus. They have a quick rise and steep decline in a short amount of time. Here are two or three food fads that demonstrate this. The following examples are based on the presumption that when someone searches on a topic that they are interested in it.

An example of food fad is Dalgona coffee induced by the isolation during COVID-19. As per Youtube searches on Google Trends~\cite{google}, \emph{“How to make Dalgona coffee”} has become the most searched type of coffee recipe worldwide. As shown in Figure~\ref{fig:dalgona}, searches worldwide for Dalgona coffee recipe peaked in mid-April and declined by the end of April.

Another example of a food fad was the increase in popularity of Kale. It was coined as “superfood” and is found now as chips or in salads. From Figure~\ref{fig:kale}, it can be seen that Kale became very popular in the United States in mid-2014 when young-adults where being drawn to a more health-conscious diet. It is now slowly declining, and its popularity is reduced by half since 2014.

A traditional Japanese tea, Matcha, has been gaining a lot of popularity lately as well. Matcha has become attractive to millennials because of green color of the drink being aesthetically pleasing as well the health benefits such as weight loss. In Figure~\ref{fig:matcha}, it can be seen how the popularity of Matcha has been increasing over the last few years, even though it has been around since the 7th Century.

# Survey

To validate our belief, we conducted a survey in which we asked the students various questions about their topic preferences when learning Data Science. They were questioned whether they would prefer learning about food topics or cancer, food or pandemics, and food or climate change. 

Using Weka, K means was performed on data collected, and on analysis, three clusters were found. From Table~\ref{weka}, we can see the information generated by Weka. If the value in the table is zero or closer to zero, it indicates that the preference is not food. If the value is closer to 1 or 1, the preference is food. It shows that there are 43\% of students in the class who are comfortable talking about grim topics as data science can be used to save lives. Also, it can be seen that 26\% of the students do not want to talk about morbid topics and it can cause communication and learning blocks in these students. The rest of the students were neural in their preference.

The above information tells us that there is a mixture model of students in the class. While some have a morbid curiosity, others prefer not to talk about grim topics. Also, from Figure~\ref{fig:pie}, we can observe that most students like food. In order to include the 26\% of the students and promote learning without any communication block, data science should be taught with topics such as food. Thus, proving our original hypothesis. 

# Example Machine Learning Algorithms\newline using Food

## Background on Gradient Descent
